---
title: Talc Powder
pubDate: Nov 21 2024
---
# Talc Powder

How talc found its way into food and agricultural products—from chewing gum to olive oil.

High in the French Pyrenees, some 1,700 m above sea level, lies Trimouns, a huge deposit of hydrated magnesium silicate—talc to you and me. Talc from Trimouns, and from ten other Luzenac mines across the globe, is used in the manufacture of a vast array of everyday products extending from paper, paint and plaster to cosmetics, plastics and car tyres. And of course there is always talc's best known end use: talcum powder for babies' bottoms. But the true versatility of this remarkable mineral is nowhere better displayed than in its sometimes surprising use in certain niche markets in the food and agriculture industries.

Take, for example, the chewing gum business. Every year, Talc de Luzenac France—which owns and operates the Trimouns mine—supplies about 6,000 tonnes of talc to chewing gum manufacturers in Europe. But how is talc actually used in the manufacture of chewing gum? Patrick Delord, an engineer who has been with Luzenac for 22 years explains that chewing gum has four main components. "The most important for us is the gum base," he says. "It's the gum base that puts the chew into chewing gum. It binds all the ingredients together, creating a soft, smooth texture. To this the manufacturer then adds sweeteners, softeners and flavourings. Our talc is used as a filler in the gum base. The amount varies between, say, 10 and 35 per cent, depending on the type of gum. Fruit flavoured chewing gum, for example, is slightly acidic and would react with the calcium carbonate that the manufacturer might otherwise use as a filler. Talc, on the other hand, makes an ideal filler because it's non-reactive chemically. In the factory, talc is also used to dust the gum base pellets and to stop the chewing gum sticking during the lamination and packing processes," Delord adds.

The chewing gum business is, however, just one example of talc's use in the food sector. For the past 20 years or so, olive oil processors in Spain have been taking advantage of talc's unique characteristics to help them boost the amount of oil they extract from crushed olives. According to Patrick Delord, talc is especially useful for treating the olives after they have been harvested to prepare them for the pressing process. "After the olives are harvested preferably early in the morning because their taste is better if they're gathered in the early morning hours, the fruit is washed and sometimes treated with talc. It helps the pressing process. The olives are crushed and the oil is released by a process of milling, instead of the old days when paste was pressed between large cloths to separate the water and oil from the solid material. The oil and water are then allowed to settle so that the more refined oil is decanted."

To combat this, farmers normally use either chemicals or spray a continuous fine canopy mist above the fruit trees or bushes. The trouble is, this uses a lot of water—normally a precious commodity in hot summer climates, and therefore expensive. What's more, the ground can quickly become waterlogged, so it’s therefore expensive." What's more, the high surface temperature of fruit, it’s too much the ultraviolet rays which harm the crops as the high surface temperature that the sun's rays create.