# The Lost Continent

A continent the size of Europe, boasting beautiful cities, advanced technology and utopian government... subjected to a great **cataclysm** and reduced to rubble that sank beneath the sea, lost forever. The legend of Atlantis has been around for thousands of years, and whatever its **factual validity** may be, it can truthfully claim a noble heritage: its earliest **proponent** was Plato.

The Greek philosopher wrote of Atlantis in two of his dialogues, “Timaeus” and “Critias,” around **370 B.C.** Plato explained that this story, which he claimed to be true, came from then-200-year-old records of the Greek ruler **Solon**, who heard of Atlantis from an Egyptian priest. Plato said that the continent lay in the Atlantic Ocean near the Straits of Gibraltar until its destruction **10,000 years** previous.

In “Timaeus,” Plato described Atlantis as a prosperous nation out to expand its domain: “Now in this island of Atlantis there was a great and wonderful empire which had rule over the whole island and several others, and over parts of the continent,” he wrote, “and, furthermore, the men of Atlantis had subjected the parts of Libya within the columns of **Heracles** as far as Egypt, and of Europe as far as Tyrrhenia.”

Plato went on to tell how the Atlanteans made a **grave mistake** by seeking to conquer Greece. They could not withstand the Greeks’ military might, and following their defeat, a natural disaster **sealed their fate**. “Timaeus” continued: “But afterwards there occurred violent earthquakes and floods; and in a single day and night of misfortune all your **warlike** men in a body sank into the earth, and the island of Atlantis in like manner disappeared in the depths of the sea.”

Interestingly, Plato told a more **metaphysical** version of the Atlantis story in “Critias.” There he described the lost continent as the kingdom of **Poseidon**, the god of the sea. This Atlantis was a noble, sophisticated society that **reigned** in peace for centuries, until its people became **complacent** and greedy. Angered by their fall from grace, Zeus chose to punish them by destroying Atlantis.

Although Plato was the first to use the term “Atlantis,” there are **antecedents** to the legend. There is an Egyptian legend which Solon probably heard while traveling in Egypt and cautioned that the island nation of **Keftiu**, home of one of the glorious advanced civilizations, was said to be a glorious advanced civilization which was destroyed and sank beneath the ocean.

In 1882, **Ignatius Donnelly**, a U.S. congressman from Minnesota, brought the legend into the American consciousness with his book, *Atlantis: The Antediluvian World*. In more recent years, the psychic **Edgar Cayce** (1877-1945) became the U.S.'s most prominent advocate for a factual Atlantis, widely known as “The Sleeping Prophet.” Cayce claimed the ability to see the future and communicate with long-dead spirits from the past. He identified hundreds of people—including himself—as **reincarnated** Atlanteans.

Cayce said that Atlantis had been situated near the **Bermuda** island of Bimini. He believed that Atlanteans possessed remarkable technologies, including supremely powerful **fire-crystals** which they harnessed for energy. A disaster in which the fire-crystals went out of control was responsible for Atlantis's sinking, he said, in what sounds very much like a **cautionary fable** on the dangers of nuclear power. Remaining active beneath the ocean waves, damaged fire-crystals send out energy fields that interfere with passing ships and aircraft—which is how Cayce accounted for the **Bermuda Triangle**.

Cayce prophesied that part of Atlantis would rise again to the surface in “**1968 or 1969.**” It didn’t, and no one has yet found hard evidence that it was ever there. With sonar tracing and modern knowledge of plate tectonics, it appears impossible that a mid-Atlantic continent could have once existed. Still, many argue that there must have been an Atlantis because of the many cultural similarities on either side of the ocean which could not have developed independently, making Atlantis quite literally a “**missing link**”—the topographical equivalent of Bigfoot.